# ka9q-radio

## Overview

Ka9q-radio is a collection of software defined radio (SDR) modules
connected by the Internet Real Time Protocol (RTP) and IP
multicasting. It is intended to facilitate experimentation and
education, and to be easy to interface to data decoders and digital
communication programs. It can also smoothly track satellite Doppler
shift in an open-loop mode when fed velocity and acceleration
information from an external program.

The ka9q-radio modules execute from the command line on either Linux
or OSX.  As yet there is no fancy graphical user interface. (This may
come later, especially if someone volunteers to create one).

## License
The License for this software is GPL3, as detailed [here](LICENSE).


## Installation
Installation instructions are [here](INSTALLING.md).

## Multicasting and the Real Time Protocol (RTP)

The ka9q-radio modules are designed for maximum versatility.  Unlike
shell pipelines or TCP/IP connections, ka9q-radio modules can be
individually started and stopped at any time, and one can feed any
number of others without prearrangement. They can run on the same
computer or on different computers on a multicast-capable network
(e.g., an Ethernet LAN).

RTP was originally designed for multicast use, though it is now used
mainly in a unicast (point-to-point) mode for voice over IP (VoIP).
It provides sequenced delivery, but like all real-time and multicast
protocols it cannot use retransmissions to guarantee delivery. This
distinguishes it from the Transmission Control Protocol (TCP) that can
only be used in a point-to-point mode for data that can tolerate
latency.

Ka9q-radio uses four RTP payload types: raw I/Q data with a custom
receiver status header; mono or stereo 16-bit uncompressed PCM audio
sampled at 48 kHz; and the new Opus codec.

It should be easy to add PCM/RTP input to any ham SDR program that
uses a computer sound card to acquire receiver audio (e.g. WSJT-X,
fldigi and many others). This would allow these programs to accept
receive audio directly over the network from the ka9q 'radio' program,
completely bypassing the computer's sound system and freeing it for
other uses.  This would be a much cleaner and more reliable interface
as there would be no analog audio cables (real or "virtual"),
"rigblaster" adapter boxes, audio ground loops, equalization problems,
or tricky level adjustments! With multicasting, any number of programs
can simultaneously process the same receiver output.

Parts of the ka9q-radio package are well suited to "turnkey" networked
receiver applications such as receive-only APRS-to-Internet gateways
and Broadcastify feeds. Service descriptions are provided for Linux
udev and systemd to load the daemons at boot time.

## Opus Compression and Audio Monitoring

Although PCM is best for digital decoders, it requires 800 kb/s for
mono and 1.6 Mb/s for stereo.  Much lower data rates suffice for human
listening over WiFi or a remote Internet connection. I use the new
Opus codec standardized by the Internet Engineering Task Force
(IETF). An excellent open-source implementation is available, and it
can be freely used without patent restrictions (unlike, e.g., ABME or
AAC).  Opus automatically switches algorithms as needed to do the best
it can with whatever data rate it is given, from very high fidelity
stereo audio at up to (an unnecessarily high) 510 kb/s down to monaural
voice at only 6 kb/s. (VK5DGR's CODEC2 can handle even lower data
rates, which is on my to-do list.)  I typically use Opus at 32 kb/s,
which is actually much higher than needed for communications-quality
audio.

Popular media players like VLC support PCM and Opus so you can listen
to ka9q-radio audio on many smartphones and tablets. Currently the
player must receive audio multicasts, which usually means it must be
on the same LAN as the computer(s) generating them. Remote unicast and
tunneled multicast connectivity is on the to-do list.

The ka9q-radio package also includes 'monitor', a RTP audio player
that can receive and mix several multicast audio streams to the local
sound output. It has a novel 'pan' feature that uses gain and delay
adjustments (<1 ms) to place each source at a user-chosen point in a
stereo image. This makes it easier to distinguish multiple sources,
e.g., in a round table. The 'monitor' program currently supports only
Opus and PCM, though CODEC2 is again on the list.

Direct, low-latency access to multicast data on remote networks
requires some form of IP multicast routing or tunneling that is not
(yet) provided in this package.  The remote multicast data you are
most likely to want is audio, so here's a simple workaround for remote
listening:

ssh remotesys 'pcmcat -2 pcm.vhf.mcast.local | opusenc --quiet --raw --bitrate 32 - -' | play -q -

This remotely executes the 'pcmcat' command, which picks up the
specified multicast group (which must be PCM audio with RTP types 10
or 11), forces the output to be stereo (which opusenc expects by
default), and compresses it with the Opus codec to 32 kb/s. The
compressed audio is then sent over the SSH channel to your local computer
where the 'play' program decompresses and plays the audio. This
requires the 'opus-tools' package on the remote system and the 'sox'
package on the local system. Latency can be several seconds because of
shell pipeline and TCP buffering.

There's no performance penalty to running Opus in stereo mode on mono
data, so for simplicity the ka9q-radio package always uses Opus in
this way.

## The KA9Q 'radio' program

The heart of the ka9q-radio package is the program 'radio', an
interactive general coverage receiver. It reads raw I/Q data multicast
by a SDR front end, sending it tuning and gain adjustments as
needed. Radio's output is a mono or stereo PCM audio multicast stream.

If audio compression is needed, a separate 'opus' module transcodes
PCM to Opus. I.e., it receives PCM, compresses it with Opus and
multicasts it to a different IP address.  This lets listeners and
players select compressed or uncompressed audio by merely joining the
corresponding multicast group.

The user interface is simple but powerful. It runs in text mode, which
makes it easy and fast to run remotely. If desired, the interactive
interface can be disabled entirely and all parameters given instead on
the command line (e.g., in shell scripts).

## Architecture

The 'radio' program accepts a generic I/Q (complex) sample stream
multicast by a computer with a direct conversion ("zero IF") SDR front
end. Many inexpensive SDR front ends are available, though at present
only the AMSAT UK FUNcube Pro+ dongle (heretofore called the "FCD") is
supported (with the 'funcube' module). The (mostly higher) sample
rates produced by other receivers such as the SDRPlay and RTL-SDR are
supported but only the FCD's 192 kHz sampling rate has actually
been tested.

An I/Q stream at 192 kHz with 16 bit samples is a constant 6.5 Mb/s
network load; this is no problem for modern Ethernet but it should be
kept away from inexpensive WiFi base stations and public Internets.
(More on problems with multicast and WiFi in the end notes).

## Hardware Artifact Removal

Although most SDR front ends use direct conversion, the complete SDR
front end/ka9q receiver combination actually forms a dual-conversion
superhet: the first LO and mixer are in analog hardware and the second
LO and mixer are in software. The first mixer, a quadrature (I/Q)
type, produces a complex first IF centered on zero Hz and extending
from -Fs/2 to +Fs/2, where Fs is the A/D sample rate.  For the FCD,
Fs = 192 kHz so the IF represents a "window" on the radio
spectrum from 96 kHz below the first LO frequency to 96 kHz
above.  (The Nyquist or minimum sample rate for a complex signal is
equal to the bandwidth; for a more familiar real signal, the Nyquist
rate is twice the signal bandwidth.)

This is often called a "zero IF" architecture but is more accurately
called a "low frequency IF".  The actual first IF can be anywhere
between -Fs/2 and +Fs/2 (including zero) provided it contains the
entire signal bandwidth. The 10 kHz near each edge from a FCD
is best avoided because of imperfect anti-alias filtering
before the A/D converters, and I presume other SDR front ends have
similar limitations.

All analog direct conversion SDR front ends produce a "DC spike" at 0
Hz from crosstalk from the first LO to the receiver input. On the FCD
this spike is about -50 dBFS (decibels below full scale, i.e., A/D
saturation). The first processing step in 'radio' completely removes
it, but reciprocal mixing produces a "mound" of low frequency phase
noise that cannot be removed. With the FCD this noise is only
noticeable within a few kilohertz of zero and then only when the
antenna is disconnected to remove external noise. But it is still easy
to avoid by simply shifting the signal to a higher IF. It is common in
these designs to place the IF near one quarter of the sample rate,
e.g., the range from +48 kHz to +51 kHz (or -51 kHz to -48 kHz) might
be selected for 3 kHz wide SSB. The 'radio' program tries to keep the
IF in one of these two ranges as the user changes frequency.

48 kHz is still an extremely low first IF by usual standards, as
ordinary pre-mixer filters cannot reject an image only 96 kHz
away. This problem is avoided by the use of complex I/Q signals that
permit the frequency image to be canceled with digital signal
processing. Good image rejection requires the 'radio' program to
compensate for any slight gain and phase imbalances between the I and
Q channels, and this is its second processing step. Typical values for
the FCD are 0.07 dB of gain imbalance and 0.4 degrees of
phase error, i.e., deviation from exactly 90 degrees between the two
channels.

Hardware artifact removal was recently added to the 'funcube' and
'hackrf' modules. It is still present in 'radio' but is disabled by
default.

## Frequency conversion

The third step is to convert the first IF signal to baseband, i.e., a
carrier frequency of 0 Hz. This is performed by the second (software)
LO and mixer using complex arithmetic to suppress the unwanted image.
The LO and mixer each require only one complex multiply per sample. No
lookup tables are used, and sine and cosine calls are needed only when
changing the LO frequency.

Another LO and mixer are optionally used for open-loop correction of
satellite Doppler shift. The 'radio' program reads velocity and
acceleration from an external program, calculates and applies the
appropriate frequency offset and rate. 

When Doppler steering is active, a second LO is added to sweep the
frequency of the first, requiring only two more complex multiplies per
sample.  Sine and cosine calls are needed only when the frequency
sweep rate is changed. The Doppler steering is so smooth and accurate
that I have been able to copy CW from a LEO cubesat transmitting on
70cm. Even on a near-overhead path, the signal was rock stable,
staying in a narrow CW filter. (Of course, this requires accurate
orbital elements and current clock time. It might be possible to use
observed frequency errors to correct a set of orbital elements.)

## Filtering and Demodulation

The baseband signal is filtered with fast correlation.  With complex
signals, the passband can be asymmetric, e.g., +100 to +3000 Hz
selects upper sideband (USB) and -100 to -3000 Hz selects LSB. A
post-detection frequency shift is provided for CW; this is equivalent
to re-tuning the radio while simultaneously sliding the filter to keep
the signal at the same point in the passband. Modes other than SSB
typically use filters centered on 0 Hz but this is not required; the
edges can be individually varied, e.g. to suppress adjacent channel
interference.

The filtered baseband signal is then fed to one of three demodulators:
'AM', 'FM' and 'Linear.'

### AM Demodulator

The AM demodulator is an ordinary non-coherent envelope detector that
simply measures the amplitude of the complex baseband signal, ignoring
the phase.  A squelch needs to be added to make it usable for aviation
communications.

### FM Demodulator

The FM demodulator handles narrow-band frequency or phase modulation by
taking the phase of a baseband signal with the arctangent function and
then differentiating it (frequency is the derivative of phase).  The
arctangent instruction is surprisingly fast even on a Raspberry Pi, so
a lot of literature on fast arctangent approximations seems to be
unnecessary. 

Two submodes are provided. 'FM' has a high pass cut on the received
audio below 300 Hz to remove PL/CTCSS tones and a standard -6
dB/octave audio de-emphasis above 300 Hz. This seems to be common
amateur NBFM practice.

The 'FMF' (FM Flat) mode is straight FM without post-detection
filtering so the signal is treble-heavy and any PL tones are
audible. Both modes use an FFT to measure PL/CTCSS tone frequencies to
0.1 Hz accuracy. SNR, frequency offset and peak deviation are also
measured and displayed.

A classic FM demodulator ignores signal amplitude, but I use it in an
experimental threshold extension scheme. Complex baseband samples with
amplitudes falling below a certain fraction of the average signal
strength are blanked. (The amplitude threshold is empirically set at
0.55 of the average). This is very effective at removing "popcorn"
noise as the SNR decreases to threshold. I'd like to see how it
compares to standard threshold extension techniques such as a narrow
PLL.

The FM squelch works from first principles: the signal-to-noise ratio
is estimated and the squelch opens when it exceeds +6 dB.  This works
so well that I've felt no need for a squelch adjustment. The squelch
originally closed so quickly that there was no tail, but I added a
short one to ensure that the tail end of a packet transmission isn't
cut off.

After the squelch closes the silent PCM output (containing all 0's)
continues for a few packets to flush any digital filters decoding the
stream. The PCM audio stream then stops to reduce network load.  The
Opus transcoder, if used, also stops producing compressed packets.
When the squelch reopens, the RTP marker bit is set to flag a jump in
the sample count. The RTP timestamp indicates how many silent samples
were suppressed. This allows programs using the input stream for
timing to maintain a proper sample count.

### Linear Demodulation

The 'linear' detector is used for all other modes, including SSB/CW,
ISB (independent sideband) and raw I/Q. In linear mode the filter
output is the audio output: both the I and Q channels for stereo modes
and just the I channel for mono. Stereo is implied by I/Q and ISB.  It
is optional for CW/SSB, where it produces an interesting effect on
headphones because of the 90 degree phase shift (Hilbert transform)
between the left (I) and right (Q) channels -- the sound no longer
seems to come from a point in the middle of your brain.  I think this
might be useful in decreasing fatigue during long contests.

The ISB mode is the same as raw I/Q except that the filter cross-adds
the positive and negative spectral components to put the 
lower sideband on the I (left) channel and the upper sideband on Q
(right).

A PLL can coherently track an AM carrier for synchronous detection,
which is usually much less noisy than regular AM envelope
detection. The carrier frequency offset is averaged and displayed;
This is useful for calibration of the SDR TCXO against an external
reference such as WWV/WWVH or the pilot carrier of a local ATSC
digital TV transmitter.

A squarer can be enabled so the PLL can track the suppressed carrier
in DSB-AM and BPSK.

## User Interface

The 'radio' program has a textual user interface that uses the
"ncurses" library. It looks primitive by 2018 standards, but it is
fully functional and very efficient over slow Internet paths. The `h`
key pops up a summary of commands. The textual user interface can also
be completely disabled and all receiver parameters given on the
command line, e.g, for invocation from a shell script in a dedicated
system.

Startup parameters are stored as files in the .radiostate directory in
the user's home directory. The parameters include the input and
output multicast domain names (or IP addresses), the tuning frequency
and step size, the filter settings and detector mode. The correlator
block size and FIR filter length can also be set here; note they
cannot be changed after the program starts except by stopping and
restarting it.

Invoking 'radio' with the name of a startup file loads its
settings. The state of the radio can be saved to a state file with the
`w` key. On normal termination the radio state is also stored as
"default". It will be automatically loaded on the next invocation if
no explicit name is given.

The various operating modes ("AM", "USB", etc) are defined in
/usr/local/share/ka9q-radio/modes.txt.  Each entry specifies a
demodulator along with filter parameters, the post-detection frequency
shift, AGC responses and option flags. For example, "USB" selects the
"linear" demodulator, a filter passband of +100 to +3000 Hz, a zero
post-detection frequency offset, an AGC attack rate of -50 dB/sec, an
AGC recovery rate of +6 dB/sec, an AGC hang time of 1.1 seconds and
mono output.

The textual screen display consists of the following status windows:

The "Tuning" window shows the RF, LO and IF frequencies. All can be
changed by the user. If Doppler correction is active, it is also shown
here but cannot be modified by the user.

The user can change frequency with the arrow keys, a Griffin Power Mate
USB knob, a mouse wheel, or by typing a complete frequency into the
pop up window invoked with the `f` command. The cursor indicates the
digit that will change with the USB knob, mouse wheel or up and down
arrow keys. The cursor can be moved to a different digit with the left
and right arrow keys, and it can be moved to the next field with the
TAB key. (Shift-TAB moves to the previous field.)

The "Carrier" and "Center" fields usually differ only in the linear
modes when the filter edges are not symmetric around 0 Hz.  The
"Carrier" field shows the (suppressed) carrier frequency that comes
out at zero Hz in the receiver output while the "Center" field
indicates the center of the receiver passband. For example, in USB
mode with a +100 to +3000 Hz frequency response, the "Center"
frequency will be (100 + 3000)/2 = 1550 Hz above the carrier
frequency.

The "shift" setting shifts the entire audio output spectrum; the
indicated carrier frequency appears at the selected frequency in the
audio output rather than 0 Hz.  This can be useful for CW operation
but is not required.

The radio is most easily tuned through the "Carrier" or "Center"
fields, but it can also be indirectly tuned through the First LO and
IF fields. The displayed LO frequency includes the estimated TCXO
frequency error and the effects of fractional-N frequency synthesis
(see the end notes).

Any number of copies of 'radio' can process the same I/Q stream
provided they share the same frequency range. When there is a
conflict, the last radio to re-tune the SDR LO wins. The other copies
will not try to fight it; without further user input they will simply
wait until the LO is again within range. To avoid unintentional
changes in the LO frequency, tab to the First LO field and hit the `l`
key; this will underline the entry to indicate that the field is
locked. The Carrier/Center frequency fields can also be locked.

The LO frequency in an I/Q recording is set at recording time and
cannot be changed during playback.

The "Signal" window shows signal, noise and SNR estimates at various
points in the signal path. Levels are in dBFS, decibels below full
scale (A/D saturation) as there is no way to know the analog gain
ahead of the A/D converters without careful calibration, which is
invariably frequency dependent. These are all output-only fields.

The "Info" window shows available information on the name of the tuned
channel or frequency band. For a ham band, the allowed emissions and
required license class are given.  These are all output-only fields,
taken from /usr/local/share/ka9q-radio/bandplan.txt.

The "Filtering" window shows the pre-detection filter settings.  The
first four parameters are user-adjustable as part of the field
sequence selected with the TAB key.  Smaller Kaiser betas give sharper
filters but poorer stop-band attenuation; 0 is equivalent to
rectangular windowing, i.e., no windowing at all. Larger betas give
wider transitions but better ultimate rejection outside the passband.
The block size and FIR (which determine the FFT frequency bin size and
filter delay) can only be set at startup from a state file or on the
command line. [See the later discussion about sample rates and
decimation.]

The "Demodulator" window is mode-specific and output-only.  The AM and
linear modes include a simple AGC and the relative audio gain is shown
(it needs a real S-meter). The FM mode shows the frequency offset,
peak deviation and PL/CTCSS tone (if present). When the selected mode
and options permit the signal-to-noise ratio to be estimated, it is
shown.  (These estimates are done differently from the SNR estimate in
the "Signal" window so they may not exactly match.)

The "Options" window selects the various options for the "Linear"
demodulator. You can select an entry with the mouse or type the mode
into a pop up box with the `o` command.

The output-only "SDR Hardware" window shows the nominal A/D sample
rate, TCXO offset, nominal tuner frequency (uncorrected by the TCXO
offset estimate), analog gain settings and gain and phase imbalance
estimates.

The "Modes" window allows a predefined operating mode to be
conveniently selected with the mouse.

The "I/O" window gives information on the input and output multicast
network streams: IP addresses or host names; port numbers; packet,
sample and error counts; and a SDR timestamp useful when playing back
recorded I/Q data. It also estimates the true input A/D sample rate
against the local computer time-of-day clock.

A "Debug" area at the very bottom of the screen shows version
information and various test and debugging messages.

Textual user input entered through pop up menus; for example the `f`
key pops up a box into which a frequency can be directly entered as
`147m435` (147.435 MHz), `760k` (760 kHz) or `1g296296` (1296.296
MHz). If no letters are used to indicate the magnitude of the decimal
point, a 'best guess' is made to produce a valid frequency; e.g. 14313
will give 14.313 MHz, not 14.313 kHz (which is below the FCD's
range). Note that some ranges are inherently ambiguous; e.g., `500`
could be either 500 kHz or 500 MHz so they should be typed with
explicit decimal points.

## 'radio' in quiet/daemon mode

The 'radio' program can run in a totally 'quiet' mode with no user
interface. This is suitable for automatic execution at boot time for
fixed channel operation (e.g., receiving and reporting APRS
transmissions). Two Linux systemd service descriptions are provided:
'radio34' and 'radio39'; the first creates an instance of 'radio'
listening on 144.39 MHz in FM mode and the latter does the same on
144.39 MHz.  Thise two instances can share the same Funcube dongle
because their frequencies are only 50 kHz apart, within the 192 kHz
bandwidth of the Funcube dongle.

144.39 MHz is the standard APRS frequency for North America; 144.34 MHz is
the secondary APRS frequency used by WB8ELK's 15-gram 'pico tracker' for
long duration balloon flights.

## Other ka9q-radio Modules

Other modules in the package provide miscellaneous functions and/or
start more complex planned features. None have especially
complex user interfaces; most take only a few command line arguments
and can run as background daemons. They are given in alphabetical order

### aprs

This unfinished module accepts decoded AX.25 frames from the 'packet'
module, extracts APRS position data from a selected station, computes
the azimuth, elevation and range to that station from a specified
point, and commands antenna rotors to point at the transmitting
station. This was written specifically for tracking high altitude
balloons.

### aprsfeed

This module also accepts decoded AX.25 frames from the 'packet'
module. It feeds those frames to the international APRS network so
position reports will automatically appear on sites such as
www.aprs.fi. It can be run as a background daemon.

### funcube

This module takes the digital IF from a locally connected FCD and multicasts
it over the local LAN. It accepts unicast commands to tune the radio
and set analog gains. It will automatically reduce gain to avoid A/D
saturation. Similar modules will be written for other SDR front ends
such as the SDRPlay and RTL-SDR that will either talk directly to the
hardware or through "shimware" such as SoapySDR.

The 'funcube' module can be automatically loaded at boot time (or at
device insertion) as a background daemon by the Linux udev/systemd
subsystem. A udev rule file and a systemd service file are
provided. Note that the latter specifies the multicast group for the
digital IF data, and this will probably require local configuration.

In daemon mode, 'funcube' writes its status to /run/funcube#/status,
where '#' is the device number (starting at 0). Scripts for two
devices are provided. The Raspberry Pi can support two devices, but I
prefer one Pi per dongle when possible.

### hackrf

This module is functionally equivalent to'funcube' except for the
HackRF One. Only reception is currently supported. The HackRF supports
sample rates up to 20 MHz but has only a 8-bit A/D, so by default it
samples at a high speed and decimates to 192 kHz, the same as the
funcube. The USB data rate and decimation processing load is too great
for a Raspberry Pi, but it will run on a low-end x86 system.

Like 'funcube', 'hackrf' can be automatically loaded at boot time
under Linux.

In daemon mode, 'hackrf' writes its status to /run/hackrf0/status.
(Only one hackrf device is currently supported, but this can be
changed.)

### iqrecord and iqplay

These modules perform the functions suggested by their
names. 'iqrecord' accepts multicast I/Q or PCM audio streams and
writes them to disk. Gaps in the multicast stream due to lost packets
or silence suppression are seeked over in a recording to maintain the
correct sample count and playback timing. With a file system that
supports "holes", disk blocks need not be allocated to these silent periods.

Raw I/Q streams are written into files named as 'iqrecord-xxxxxx-n'
where xxxxxx is the RTP SSRC (Stream Source Identifier) and 'n' is a
number incremented to avoid overwriting existing recordings. PCM
streams are written as 'pcmrecord-xxxxxx-n'. Both files are written as
raw, header-less 16-bit PCM with all meta information in extended file
attributes.

Most but not all modern file systems support extended attributes; a
notable exception is Microsoft's VFAT32 often used as a
least-common-denominator for file exchange between different operating
systems. Warning! Many file copy and archiving utilities do not
preserve extended attributes, at least not by default.

I/Q and PCM recordings have many uses. An I/Q recording preserves
everything within the front end passband regardless of modulation type
or bandwidth (provided it fits within the receiver passband). This is
useful for testing and for demonstrating the 'radio' program when an
antenna is not available.

I/Q recordings are especially useful as backups during critical
events, such as a satellite pass or balloon flight. An I/Q recorder
placed next to the SDR hardware depends only on the antenna, SDR
hardware and I/Q multicast program (e.g. 'funcube').  This can guard
against bugs (or the outright failure) of downstream network or
processing elements, e.g., a digital data demodulator. After the
demodulator is fixed, the recording can be played back to recover the
data.

And of course nothing limits you to just one I/Q recording.

'iqrecord' is an excellent example of the versatility of multicasting;
it can just sit quietly in the corner backing everything up without
impairing any other element that might be processing the same stream.

The 'iqplay' module plays back I/Q recordings (only -- no PCM support
at present) using the meta data contained in the external file
attributes. It can also read a raw I/Q sample stream from standard input to
simulate SDR front end hardware.

### modulate

A simple (and unfinished) test modulator that takes baseband audio,
amplitude modulates it on a specified carrier frequency, and emits it
on standard output as an I/Q sample stream.

### opus

The 'opus' module was described earlier as an optional "transcoder"
that accepts uncompressed PCM (either mono or stereo) and produces a
lower bit rate compressed version with the Opus codec. Options include
a range of block sizes from 2.5 milliseconds to 120 ms. The larger
blocks are useful only to reduce packet rate and header overhead; they
provide no additional compression and are supported only by more
recent versions of the Opus library. The default is 20 ms, which is
long enough to give good compression but short enough to be
essentially unnoticeable.

The compressed output data rate is specified by a command line
parameter that defaults to 32 kb/s. This produces surprisingly good
audio even on stereo music.

The Opus codec also supports a VOX-like "discontinuous" mode well
suited to half-duplex push-to-talk amateur operation. When silence is
detected, it automatically drops to sending "comfort noise" at only 3
packets per second even as the PCM input stream continues. If the PCM
input stream stops, the Opus output stops regardless of the
discontinuous setting.

Opus streams are always stereo even when the audio is mono. There is
no capacity penalty and it simplifies things.

'Opus' can be run as a daemon; systemd 'service' config files are provided.

### opussend

This is a standalone utility that takes PCM audio from a local sound interface,
compresses it with Opus and multicasts it as an RTP network stream.

### packet

This module is my first digital demodulator module for the ka9q-radio
package. It accepts PCM audio from the 'radio' program, demodulates
the ancient Bell 202A AFSK modem tones and decodes AX.25 frames.  The
decoded frames are multicast as RTP/UDP packets.  The decoded frames
can also optionally be displayed on the console. Otherwise the module
can run as an unattended daemon.

'Packet' can be run as a daemon; a systemd 'service' file is provided.

### pcmsend

This is the same as opussend, except that the output stream is
uncompressed 48 kHz PCM (mono or stereo).

### pcmcat

This joins a specified multicast group, which must carry uncompressed
PCM audio (RTP types 10 or 11) and emits the PCM stream on standard
output.  This is useful for piping into an audio compressor for remote
transmission.


## Footnotes and Side bars

### Sample Rates and Decimation

The I/Q input sample rate must be an integer multiple of the 48 kHz
audio output rate.  Decimation is performed as a byproduct of the fast
correlator used for pre-detection filtering. Since the input FFT in a
fast correlator executes at the input sample rate, CPU loading will
increase. Although the CPU loading at 192 kHz is small even on a
Raspberry Pi, faster and simpler decimators are in the works to
support much higher sampling rates.

By default the filter decimates the FCD 192 kHz A/D input sample
rate by a factor of 4 to a 48 kHz audio output.  Other SDR front ends
with higher sample rates will require correspondingly higher
decimation ratios.  Although 48 kHz may seem excessive for
communications-grade audio, I don't recommend reducing it. 48 kHz is
supported by nearly every audio D/A, and it still uses only 0.154% of
a gigabit Ethernet link.

The Opus codec strongly prefers 48 kHz stereo even for narrow band mono
voice, and there seems to be no advantage to mono or a lower sample
rate (i.e., the compressed data rate is not reduced nor is audio
quality improved at a given rate.) So if the audio bit rate is a
concern, just use Opus with a specified data rate; don't reduce the
PCM sample rate.

Because digital demodulators should be fed uncompressed PCM, they are
best run on a computer with a fast network path to the radio program
so they can be given uncompressed PCM.  (Audio compression works by
eliminating signal components inaudible to the human ear, but which
may be very important for a digital demodulator.)

### Filter Tradeoffs

Simultaneously improving both filter roll off and stop-band attenuation
requires a longer FIR impulse response. This requires greater latency
and somewhat increased CPU loading.  Currently, the filter block size
and FIR length can only be specified on the command line or in the
startup file, i.e., they cannot be changed without restarting the
program. Note: the length of the FFT executed by the filter is equal
to the sum of the block size and FIR length minus one. The default
block size of 3840 corresponds to 960 samples after 4:1 decimation to
48 kHz; this is the number of samples in a 20 ms Opus frame. 3840 +
4353 - 1 = 8192, i.e., the FFT has 8k points. While the FFTW package
can handle any number of points, a power of 2 is more efficient. I've
found the default parameters to be suitable for most purposes.

### Fractional-N Frequency Synthesizer Artifacts

Because the first LO in the FCD is in analog hardware with
the usual synthesizer tuning glitches, it is re tuned only when
necessary to contain the desired signal in the first IF, i.e., between
-Fs/2 and +Fs/2. Otherwise tuning is with the second (software) LO
that can be smoothly and instantly tuned without glitching. This is
especially important when decoding digital satellite telemetry with
open-loop Doppler correction.

Like most modern radios, the FCD uses fractional-N frequency
synthesis with inherent restrictions on the actual set of frequencies
that can be produced. Although its programming interface accepts
frequencies in 1 Hz steps, the actual tuning step size varies with
frequency; in the HF and VHF range it is 1000/2048 = 0.48828 Hz so it
cannot produce exact 1 Hz frequency steps.

The 'radio' program works around this in two independent ways. First,
the hardware synthesizer programming formulas and constants from the
FCD firmware are used to determine the actual LO frequency so any
discrepancy can be corrected by the second LO. Second, only
frequencies that the synthesizer can exactly produce are selected,
restricting the synthesizer to a relative large step size. The step
size varies with frequency so the worst (largest) value of 125 Hz is
always used, with the difference again absorbed by the second
LO. Although these two fixes are specific to the FCD, other
SDRs undoubtedly have the same problem subject to the same workarounds
-- if I can get the necessary details.

### Multicasting and WiFi

High speed multicast streams can cause problems with many consumer
grade WiFi base stations. Although multicasting is widely used for
resource discovery (especially by Apple devices), the low data rates
do not cause any problems. But a raw I/Q multicast stream from a
FCD is about 6.5 Mb/s. This will cause many consumer-grade
WiFi access points to roll over and die.

WiFi (especially the later versions) dynamically adapts to varying
link conditions with a very wide range of transmission speeds, from
only 1 Mb/s in 802.11b to over 1 Gb/s for 802.11ac.  This is great for
unicast traffic because the base station transmits to each client
station at the fastest rate it can receive. If a client fails to
acknowledge a transmission, the base station can retry at lower rates
until it gets through.

The problem is that WiFi multicasts are not acknowledged, so to ensure
that they reach everyone they are transmitted at a low and usually
fixed data rate.  Sometimes this fixed rate can be changed, but
usually not.  So a channel that typically operates at, say, 200 Mb/s
may grind to a near halt when a lot of multicast traffic must be sent
at only a few megabits/sec. If the multicast traffic arrives faster
than it can be sent, the problem is obvious.

Several fixes and workarounds are available, but usually only in base
stations designed for commercial environments. I have a pair of
Engenius EAP600 access points at home that implement both
solutions. This particular model is now discontinued but many current
models from different manufacturers continue to provide them.

The first fix is IGMP Snooping. By listening in on the Internet Group
Management Protocol (IGMP) messages sent by each computer to indicate
the multicast groups it subscribes to, an Ethernet switch can avoid
sending multicast traffic to ports where nobody wants it.  A WiFi base
station usually contains an internal Ethernet switch, and if it
implements IGMP snooping it can avoid relaying multicast traffic to the
radio channel when no one wants it.

But what if a wireless client wants the multicast traffic? The fix
here is "multicast to unicast conversion". The base station keeps
track (with IGMP snooping) of which wireless clients want traffic to
which multicast groups, and each group member is sent its own copy of
the multicast packet as a unicast at whatever speed is necessary to
reach that client, which then acknowledges it like any other unicast
packet.  This works very well when only a few wireless clients
subscribe to multicast groups and/or the links to those clients can
operate at high speed, as is usually the case. The time required to
send each client its own copy as a high speed unicast is still far
less than the time to send a single copy as a low speed multicast.

The problem is that most consumer-grade WiFi base stations implement
neither IGMP snooping or multicast-to-unicast conversion. This may
eventually change thanks to the AT&T U-verse service. U-verse carries
TV in high speed multicast streams (about 7 Mb/s for HDTV). The U-verse
gateway implements IGMP snooping, but countless customers have run into
the problems described above when they try to use their own access points.

So how to solve the problem without buying a commercial-grade access point?

One is to simply isolate the ka9q-radio modules from the rest of your
network with a stand alone switch. But this is an unsatisfactory
solution since it makes everything less convenient to use. Another is
to buy a switch with IGMP snooping to connect the ka9q-radio modules
to the rest of your network (or at least your WiFi access point).
Nearly every "smart" or "managed" switch supports IGMP snooping while
unmanaged switches do not because there is no way to configure
it. These managed switches are no longer expensive; the Netgear
GS105Ev2, a 5-port managed switch that supports IGMP snooping, is
currently $33.81 on Amazon.

Consumer grade WiFi access points can still handle moderate multicast
traffic, such as an Opus-compressed audio stream. So you can still
listen to receiver audio on your laptop computer if you use an
IGMP-snooping switch to isolate your access point from the high rate
multicast streams between the SDR front end hardware and the 'radio'
program, and between the 'radio' program and the Opus transcoder.

IP Multicast itself provides another way to confine high speed
streams. The Time-to-Live field in the IP header limits the number of
times a packet can be routed, and this field can be configured in each
ka9q-radio module that generates them.  Although Ethernet switches and
WiFi access points are link level devices that do not look at the IP
TTL field, setting TTL=0 means that the multicast stream won't even
leave the computer that generates it. It can only be received by
another process on the same computer. This can keep high speed
multicast I/Q streams completely off your LAN if you are willing to
run the 'radio' (and 'iqrecord' and 'iqplay') programs on the same
physical computer as the 'funcube' program and hardware. If the 'opus'
transcoder is also run on the same system, the 'radio' program can
also set TTL=0 on its PCM audio output stream. Note that this would
require that any other programs that need a PCM audio input also run
on the same physical machine.


Updated 8 Sept 2018, Phil Karn, KA9Q

